NMS-14616: Quick Start - Performance Data Gathering (#5263)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/quick-start/performance-data.adoc

= Step 4: Set Up Performance Data Collection

This section describes how to set up performance data collection in {page-component-title}.

> {page-component-title} collects performance data using xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/collectd.adoc[collectd], which is enabled by default.

Reviewer: Confusingly, there is a totally unrelated open-source project called [`collectd`](https://collectd.org/) which does the same sorts of things and which many of our new users may have encountered in the past. Let's add an info box calling out the distinction, please.

> Collectd schedules data collection on network entities using management agents and protocol-specific collectors.

Author: ```suggestion
Collectd schedules data collection on network entities using management agents and protocol-specific collectors.

NOTE: In the {page-component-title} docs, any reference to collectd refers to the {page-component-title} collect daemon, not the open source project of the same name.

```

Data collection for SNMP and OpenNMS-JVM is enabled by default, allowing {page-component-title} to monitor itself through JMX.

For additional information, including collector configuration, see xref:operation:deep-dive/performance-data-collection/introduction.adoc[Performance Management] in the Deep Dive section.

== Before you begin

> {page-component-title} data collection for SNMP works out of the box, provided your SNMP string is configured correctly.

Reviewer: Let's use "SNMP credentials" rather than "SNMP string".

Author: ```suggestion
{page-component-title} data collection for SNMP works out of the box, provided your SNMP credentials are configured correctly.
```

> The default value for the community string is `public`.

Reviewer: Community string is used only for SNMPv1 and SNMPv2c. SNMPv3 uses a different mechanism. I know we want to avoid rabbit-holes in this guide, so maybe we add an info box to the effect:

If you are using SNMPv3, you will need to configure details for a USM (User-based Security Model) user instead of a community string. {page-component-title} fully supports SNMPv3 and USM, but these topics are outside the scope of this guide. Please see the [link to deep-dive] for more information.

Author: It looks like we don't have documentation about these topics as they relate to performance data gathering. I'll take a note and see if we should make a ticket to add them to the docs.

```suggestion
The default value for the community string is `public`.

NOTE: If you are using SNMPv3, you need to configure details for a User-Based Security Model (USM) user instead of a community string.
{page-component-title} supports SNMPv3 and USM, but these topics are outside of the scope of this guide.

```

If your community string is different, you need to change it by following these steps:

. In the web UI, click the *Gear* symbol at the top-right of the screen.
. Choose menu:Provisioning[Configure SNMP Community Names by IP Address].
. In the v1/v2c Specific Parameters section, enter the new community string in the *Read Community String* box.
. Click *Save Config* to save your changes.

Performance data collection on other protocols (HTTPS, JMX, and so on) requires additional configuration.
You may also want to change how collectd works—when, how, and what data it collects.
For more information, see xref:reference:performance-data-collection/introduction.adoc[Collectors].

== Default performance data collection

> By default, {page-component-title} collects a large variety of information from associated nodes.

Reviewer: Let's say "from monitored nodes that support SNMP" here.

Author: ```suggestion
By default, {page-component-title} collects a large variety of information from monitored nodes that support SNMP.
```

This information includes widely-implemented metrics that are standard for MIB-2 sources (for example, TCP group data, network interface counters).
SNMP data collection definitions are also included for devices from a range of popular vendors (for example, if you add a Cisco router to your instance, {page-component-title} will automatically collect Cisco-specific metrics).
The metrics included in these collections vary by vendor.

== SNMP collections and data collection groups

SNMP collections collect, store, and persist performance data.

> Two collections are defined by default: `default` and `ejn`.

Reviewer: The `ejn` collection is highly specialized and most users don't need to know about it. Feel free to write around its very existence.

Author: ```suggestion
Two collections are defined by default: `default` and `ejn`.
Because the `ejn` collection is highly specialized, we recommend that you do not modify it.
```

Data collection groups collect sets of performance data measurements for persisting, indexing, and visualizing the data in the UI.

> Individual data collection groups are stored in unique `.xml` files, which define associated resource types, MIB groups, and system definitions.

Reviewer: Insert (tweak as needed): System definitions bring together MIB groups with partial or full values of SNMP `sysObjectID`, enabling effortless automatic collection of appropriate metrics from devices for which they exist.

Author: ```suggestion
Individual data collection groups are stored in unique `.xml` files, which define associated resource types, MIB groups, and system definitions.
System definitions bring together MIB groups with full or partial SNMP `sysObjectID` values, enabling automatic collection of appropriate metrics from devices for which they exist.
```

{page-component-title} collects performance data using xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/collectd.adoc[collectd], which is enabled by default.
Collectd schedules data collection on network entities using management agents and protocol-specific collectors.

NOTE: In the {page-component-title} docs, any reference to collectd refers to the {page-component-title} collect daemon, not the open source project of the same name.

Data collection for SNMP and OpenNMS-JVM is enabled by default, allowing {page-component-title} to monitor itself through JMX.

For additional information, including collector configuration, see xref:operation:deep-dive/performance-data-collection/introduction.adoc[Performance Management] in the Deep Dive section.

== Before you begin

{page-component-title} data collection for SNMP works out of the box, provided your SNMP credentials are configured correctly.

The default value for the community string is `public`.

NOTE: If you are using SNMPv3, you need to configure details for a User-Based Security Model (USM) user instead of a community string.
{page-component-title} supports SNMPv3 and USM, but these topics are outside of the scope of this guide.

> If your community string is different, you need to change it by following these steps:

Reviewer: Leaving the community string set to `public` in production is a security worst practice. We're not here to preach, and this is a quick-start guide, so I didn't bring it up.

> If your community string is different, you need to change it by following these steps:

Reviewer 2: I think we should still add a note that we recommend changing it. We do recommend that they not use the default password, so add a comment similar to that.

. In the web UI, click the *Gear* symbol at the top-right of the screen.

> . Choose menu:Provisioning[Configure SNMP Community Names by IP Address].

Reviewer: Insert missing steps (I just caught this, sorry it's last-minute):
- Enter a valid IP address and click *Look up*.
- In the *Updating SNMP Configuration* section, choose `v2c` or `v1` for *Version* as appropriate for your environment
- If you wish to configure SNMP credentials for a range of addresses, set the *First IP Address* and *Last IP Address* inputs to describe the desired range

Author: ```suggestion
. Choose menu:Provisioning[Configure SNMP Community Names by IP Address].
. Set up the configuration as appropriate for your environment:
** Enter a valid IP address in the *IP Address* box, and click *Look Up*.
** Choose an SNMP version (`v2c` or `v1`) from the *Version* list.
** (Optional) Define a range of IP addresses by typing the first and last addresses of the range into the *First IP Address* and *Last IP Address* boxes, respectively.
```

> . In the v1/v2c Specific Parameters section, enter the new community string in the *Read Community String* box.

Author: ```suggestion
** In the v1/v2c Specific Parameters section, enter the new community string in the *Read Community String* box.
```

. Click *Save Config* to save your changes.

Performance data collection on other protocols (HTTPS, JMX, and so on) requires additional configuration.
You may also want to change how collectd works—when, how, and what data it collects.
For more information, see xref:reference:performance-data-collection/introduction.adoc[Collectors].

== Default performance data collection

By default, {page-component-title} collects a large variety of information from monitored nodes that support SNMP.
This information includes widely-implemented metrics that are standard for MIB-2 sources (for example, TCP group data, network interface counters).
SNMP data collection definitions are also included for devices from a range of popular vendors (for example, if you add a Cisco router to your instance, {page-component-title} will automatically collect Cisco-specific metrics).

> The metrics included in these collections vary by vendor.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused due to collections, definitions, metrics, and what distinctions we need to make.

Do the definitions define the metric collected? Does "collections" here refer to the data that is collected or the definitions?

Reviewer: "Definitions" is a blanket term for "what's in the relevant config files".
"Collections" refers to the container which pulls together the "what" and the "where" of what gets collected. This idea maps to the `snmp-collection` tag in `etc/datacollection-config.xml`.
"Metrics" are the "what" inside the collection. This idea maps to the `mibObj` tag in the same file.

I can go deeper if it will be helpful, but I'm cutting myself off here unless you request more.

= Step 4: Set Up Performance Data Collection

This section describes how to set up performance data collection in {page-component-title}.

{page-component-title} collects performance data using xref:reference:daemons/daemon-config-files/collectd.adoc[collectd], which is enabled by default.
Collectd schedules data collection on network entities using management agents and protocol-specific collectors.

> NOTE: In the {page-component-title} docs, any reference to collectd refers to the {page-component-title} collect daemon, not the open source project of the same name.

Reviewer: Let's say "not the independent open source project of the same name". There's still a little room for confusion since we are ourselves an open-source project, but I think adding this word mitigates it a little.

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: In the {page-component-title} docs, any reference to collectd refers to the {page-component-title} collect daemon, not the independent open source project of the same name.
```

Data collection for SNMP and OpenNMS-JVM is enabled by default, allowing {page-component-title} to monitor itself through JMX.

For additional information, including collector configuration, see xref:operation:deep-dive/performance-data-collection/introduction.adoc[Performance Management] in the Deep Dive section.

== Before you begin

{page-component-title} data collection for SNMP works out of the box, provided your SNMP credentials are configured correctly.

The default value for the community string is `public`.
We recommend that you do not use the default community string in production.

NOTE: If you are using SNMPv3, you need to configure details for a User-Based Security Model (USM) user instead of a community string.
{page-component-title} supports SNMPv3 and USM, but these topics are outside of the scope of this guide.

To change the community string, follow these steps:

> . In the web UI, click the *Gear* symbol at the top-right of the screen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the *Gear* symbol at the top-right of the screen.
```
